AMP-71940 One-pager for next-gen SDKs (#678)
Amplitude-Developer-Docs/amplitude-dev-center: docs/data/sdks/sdk-architecture.md

```typescript
// Latest Browser SDK example: track an event without creating one 

import * as amplitude from '@amplitude/analytics-browser';

// Track a basic event
amplitude.track('Button Clicked');

// Track events with optional properties
const eventProperties = {
  buttonColor: 'primary',
};
amplitude.track('Button Clicked', eventProperties);
```

### Plugin

Plugins allow you to extend Amplitude SDK's behavior. Please check [here](../../sdk-plugin) for more details. 

## Common methods

Latest SDKs share the same architecture as well as the same interfaces. Aligned interfaces benefit using Amplitude SDKs on multiple platforms without memorizing different function names.

This a list of shared interfaces of latest SDKs. 

!!!note 
    Different SDKs follow different naming conventions. Here use camel case for methods and parameters and use pascal case for classes. 

- `init(apiKey)`
- `track(BaseEvent)`
- `identify(IdentifyEvent)`
- `setGroup(groupType, groupName)`
- `groupIdentify(groupType, groupName, IdentifyEvent)`
- `revenue(RevenueEvent)`
- `flush()`
- `add(Plugin)`
- `remove(Plugin)`
- `shutdown()`

## Comparison with maintenance SDK

> If you are migrating from maintenance SDKs, you may notice that latest SDKs differ from maintenance SDKs not only in terms of interfaces but also in their Middleware vs Plugin architecture . You can think of Middleware as being equal to Enrichment Plugin and Destination Plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are migrating from maintenance SDKs, you may notice that latest SDKs differ in terms of interfaces. 
 * `logEvent()` has been renamed `track()`.
 *  Middleware has been replaced by Plugins . When migrating from Middleware, it be easily be converted to an Enrichment or Destination Plugin by overriding the `execute()` method.
```

## SDK status table

|Platform|Follow the latest architecture|Not follow the latest architecture|
|--------|--------|-----------|

> |Browser|:octicons-package-16: `@amplitude/analytics-browser`<br/>[:material-github: Amplitude-TypeScript](https://github.com/amplitude/Amplitude-TypeScript)<br/>[:material-file-document: Document](./typescript-browser/index.md)|:material-hammer-screwdriver:{.red} Maintenance SDK<br/>:octicons-package-16: `@amplitude/amplitude-js`<br/>[:material-github: Amplitude-JavaScript](https://github.com/amplitude/Amplitude-JavaScript)<br/>[:material-file-document: Document](./javascript/index.md)|

Reviewer: I think it would be good to have the packages link to releases page for that package e.g. ":octicons-package-16: `@amplitude/amplitude-js`" would liknk to JS SDK releases.

## Architecture

The next-gen SDKs share the same architecture and interfaces across platform. This page covers the high-level functionality across all next-gen SDKs. Refer to the individual SDK documentation for more detailed examples.

![Next-gen Architecture](/../assets/images/data-next-gen-sdk-architecture.drawio.svg)

### Client

Amplitude Client stores configurations and is also the entry point for developers to track events. 

Before instrumenting events, you must initialize a SDK client instance using the API key for your Amplitude project. 

```typescript
// Next-gen Browser SDK example: initialize a Client

import * as amplitude from '@amplitude/analytics-browser';

amplitude.init('API_KEY');
```

### Configuration

Configuration includes the options to configure Client behavior. 

You can pass a Configuration on Client initialization.

```typescript
// Next-gen Browser SDK example: initialize a Client with a Configuration

import * as amplitude from '@amplitude/analytics-browser';
 
amplitude.init('API_KEY', 'OPTIONAL_USER_ID', {
  flushQueueSize: 50, // flush queued events when there are 100 or more

>   flushIntervalMillis: 20000, // flush queued events every 20 seconds

Author: Changed it to (queue = 30, interval = 1000) as the default value for `flushIntervalMillis` is 1 second

  useBatch: true //use batch mode with batch API endpoint, `https://api2.amplitude.com/batch`
});
```

> 

Reviewer: What about adding a collapsed list of common configuration options here? I think it would be helpful. Since this doc is cross platform we can limit it to options that are common to all, and add a mention to see the individual platform SDK pages for a full list.

Author: Added a common config options section based on the spreadsheet https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1xb63_jcP1xE1Pf_RpcKeakbGL1bib_RVe50MJge3_PU/edit?usp=sharing

  disable(): void {
    console.log('Logger has been disabled');
  }

  enable(logLevel: amplitude.Types.LogLevel): void {
    console.log('Logger has been enabled with level:', logLevel);
  }

  log(...args: any[]): void {
    // Implementation for the log method
    console.log(...args);
  }

  warn(...args: any[]): void {
    // Implementation for the warn method
    console.log(...args);
  }

  error(...args: any[]): void {
    // Implementation for the error method
    console.log(...args);
  }

  debug(...args: any[]): void {
    // Implementation for the debug method
    console.log(...args);
  }
}

amplitude.init('API_KEY', 'OPTIONAL_USER_ID', {
  loggerProvider: new MyLogger(),
});
```

### Event 

Events represent how users interact with your application. 

`BaseEvent` represents a basic event with optional properties. You can also track other event properties in the field of `EventProperties`

```typescript
// Next-gen Browser SDK example: track events

import * as amplitude from '@amplitude/analytics-browser';

// Track a basic event
amplitude.track('Button Clicked');

// Track events with optional properties
const eventProperties = {
  buttonColor: 'primary',
};

> amplitude.track('Button Clicked', eventProperties);

Reviewer: Since this section is about Events vs track I think it would be good to focus on the event object and then mention that `track()` provides some convenience methods for sending Events by type, and type w/ properties, as they are a common case.

```
const myEvent: BaseEvent = {
  eventType: "My Event"
  eventProperties: {
    myEventProp: true,
  }
}

amplitude.track(myEvent);

// Send event by type only
amplitude.track('Button Clicked');

//Send event with type and properties
amplitude.track('Button Clicked', { buttonName: 'Success' });
```

Author: It makes sense to have both of them here. Changes applied

A plugin is an object with methods `setup()` and `execute()`:

- `setup()` method contains logic for preparing the plugin for use and has Client instance as a parameter. The expected return value is None. A typical use for this method is to copy configuration from `client.configuration` or instantiate plugin dependencies. This method is called when you register the plugin to the client via `client.add()`.

- `execute()` method contains the logic for processing events and has event instance as parameter. The expected return value for an Enrichment Plugin is the modified/enriched event, while the expected return value for a Destination Plugin is a map with keys: `event` (BaseEvent), `code` (HTTP response status code), and `message` (string). This method is called for each event that's instrumented using the client interface, including Identify, GroupIdentify and Revenue events.

!!!note
    if `execute()` doesn't returns an event, the event will **NOT** propagate through the remaining plugins

>     ???code-example "a drop-event plugin example (click to expand)"

Reviewer: I think we can put this up in the enrichment section as "Use an Enrichment Plugin to filter events"

Reviewer: import * as amplitude from '@amplitude/analytics-browser';
import { EnrichmentPlugin, BrowserConfig, PluginType, Event } from '@amplitude/analytics-types';

class FilterEventsPlugin implements EnrichmentPlugin {
name = 'filter-event-plugin';
type = PluginType.ENRICHMENT as any;

async setup(config: BrowserConfig): Promise<void> {
    return undefined;
}

async execute(event: Event): Promise<Event | null> {
    // ignore events with a certain property
    if (event.event_properties['ignore'] === true){
      // returning null will prevent this event from being processed by subsequent plugins
      return null;
    }

    // Allow other events to be processed and sent to destination plugins
    return event
}

amplitude.init('API_KEY');
amplitude.add(new FilterEventsPlugin());

|iOS|:octicons-package-16: `AmplitudeSwift`<br/>[:material-github: Amplitude-Swift](https://github.com/amplitude/Amplitude-Swift)<br/>[:material-file-document: Document](./ios-swift/index.md)|:octicons-package-16: `Amplitude`<br/>[:material-github: Amplitude-iOS](https://github.com/amplitude/Amplitude-iOS)<br/>[:material-file-document: Document](./ios/index.md)
|Python|:octicons-package-16: `amplitude-analytics`<br/>[:material-github: Amplitude-Python](https://github.com/amplitude/Amplitude-Python)<br/>[:material-file-document: Document](./python/index.md)||
|Go|:octicons-package-16: `github.com/amplitude/analytics-go`<br/>[:material-github: analytics-go](https://github.com/amplitude/analytics-go)<br/>[:material-file-document: Document](./go/index.md)||
|Unity|:octicons-package-16: `amplitude-unity.unitypackage`<br/>[:material-github: unity-plugin](https://github.com/amplitude/unity-plugin)<br/>[:material-file-document: Document](./unity/index.md)||

> |Unreal|:octicons-package-16: `AmplitudeUnreal`<br/>[:material-github: Amplitude-Unreal](https://github.com/amplitude/Amplitude-Unreal)<br/>[:material-file-document: Document](./unreal/index.md)||

Reviewer: Unity and unreal are not next-gen.

---
title: SDK Architecture
description: Overview to Amplitude Analytics SDK architecture and common usage
---

> This article helps you remove confusion around various Amplitude Analytics SDKs and introduces their architecture, common methods and benefits.

Reviewer 2: This article helps you remove confusion around various Amplitude Analytics SDKs and introduces the architecture, common methods, and benefits of the latest SDKs.
```suggestion
This article helps you remove confusion around various Amplitude Analytics SDKs and mainly focuses on introducing the architecture, common methods, and benefits of the latest SDK structure.
```
I think the doc is mainly focused on the architecture, common methods, and benefits not on all various SDKs.

Most Amplitude Analytics SDKs share the same architecture that works similarly across all platforms making it easy to understand how the Analytics works regardless of the exact environment and runtime. (1)
{ .annotate }

1.  There are still some SDKs that don't follow this architecture: iOS, Flutter, Java, Unity, Unreal and Maintenance SDKs (1) (Browser, Andorid, React Native, and Node.js)
    { .annotate }

    1.  Maintenance SDKs are time tested, stable SDKs of old. Once a new SDK is available for a given platform, the older SDK is moved to maintenance status and under the Maintenance SDKs section in the site navigation. Maintenance SDKs only receives bug fixes until deprecation. It's strongly recommended to new SDKs to take advantage of their benefits. To migrate from a maintenance SDK, refer to the migration guide under each maintenance SDK documentation

Refer to the [SDK status table](./#sdk-status-table) to check whether a SDK follows the architecture

> ## Next-gen benefits 

Reviewer 2: I think we shouldn not use `Next-gen` anymore since the title has been updated to other.

Reviewer 2: How about `the benefit of the modern structure`?

```typescript
// Next-gen Browser SDK example: track an event

import * as amplitude from '@amplitude/analytics-browser';
import {BaseEvent} from '@amplitude/analytics-types';

const buttonClickedEvent: BaseEvent = {
  event_type: 'Button Clicked',
  event_properties: {
    buttonColor: 'primary',
  }
}

amplitude.track(buttonClickedEvent);
```

Some SDKs also allow you to track an event without creating one but just pass the event type as a string.

```typescript
// Next-gen Browser SDK example: track an event without creating one 

import * as amplitude from '@amplitude/analytics-browser';

// Track a basic event
amplitude.track('Button Clicked');

// Track events with optional properties
const eventProperties = {
  buttonColor: 'primary',
};
amplitude.track('Button Clicked', eventProperties);
```

### Plugin

Plugins allow you to extend Amplitude SDK's behavior by, for example:

- Use an Enrichment Plugin to modify event properties
!!!example "Enrichment plugin examples"
    
    ???code-example "Remove PII (Personally Identifiable Information) (click to expand)"
        

>         ```typescript
>         import * as amplitude from '@amplitude/analytics-browser';
>         import { EnrichmentPlugin, BrowserConfig, PluginType, Event } from '@amplitude/analytics-types';
> 
>         class RemovePIIPlugin implements EnrichmentPlugin {
>         name = 'remove-PII-plugin';
>         type = PluginType.ENRICHMENT as any;
> 
>         async setup(config: BrowserConfig): Promise<void> {
>             return undefined;
>         }
> 
>         async execute(event: Event): Promise<Event> {
>             // remove PII here 
> 
>             // return modified events with PII removed
>             return event
>         }
>         }
> 
>         amplitude.init('API-KEY');
>         amplitude.add(new RemovePIIPlugin());
>         ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        ```typescript
        import * as amplitude from '@amplitude/analytics-browser';
        import { EnrichmentPlugin, BrowserConfig, PluginType, Event } from '@amplitude/analytics-types';

        class RemovePIIPlugin implements EnrichmentPlugin {
          name = 'remove-PII-plugin';
          type = PluginType.ENRICHMENT as any;
  
          async setup(config: BrowserConfig): Promise<void> {
              return undefined;
          }
  
          async execute(event: Event): Promise<Event> {
              // remove PII on the event
              if(event.user_properties['phone']) {
                delete event.user_properties['phone'];
                
                // set a new prop to mark this event as modified
                event.event_properties['pii-removed'] = true;
              }
  
              // return modified event with PII removed
              return event
          }
        }

        amplitude.init('API-KEY');
        amplitude.add(new RemovePIIPlugin());
        ```
```
